Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
Philip Jose Farmer has been a mainstay science fiction writer since 1952.
He has written over 40 novels and over 80 short stories focusing on a wide variety of subjects.
These range from Tarzan to the afterlife, from sex-crazed aliens to a star-faring Catholic
priest. Farmer's most famous works are the River World series, The World of Tears series,
his erotic fantasy novels, and the story later a novel The Lovers. We ask Farmer how he started
writing science fiction. I started reading science fiction when I was seven years old.
I'm 63 now, and I knew I always wanted to be a writer.
All I did was do much about it for many years. The funny thing is I actually intended to become
a mainstream writer, that is to write stories which are not in particular genre. But I somehow
just drifted into science fiction and sold my first science fiction story in 1952.
That was called The Lovers. It was a novel novel that was published in a magazine, and it's generally
credited with breaking the taboo against the mature use of sex in science fiction magazines.
We asked Farmer if he consciously set out to break taboos by writing The Lovers.
No, I had an idea for a story, and I couldn't write it unless I broke the taboo. I didn't
really consciously set out to do it because I had the idea, and I thought it was terrific.
On the other hand, I knew I was going to have a lot of trouble getting an accepted idea.
I did have a lot of trouble. The first editor I sent it to, John Campbell, the editor of The
Lovers, was the most prestigious and highest paying market, and actually I sent it to him first.
He returned it with a comment that I'm not sure you're reading.
So I sent it to Horace Gold, who was editing Galaxy, which was equally prestigious and had
about the same word rate. His comments were something like John Campbell's. Then I sent it to
Samuel Mines, who was editor of a magazine called Starling Stories.
He immediately accepted it and knew it was a revolutionary breakthrough. He published it,
and I was on my way. Accepted the next story I wrote was also equally revolutionary, and
it took me a year before I could get anybody to accept it.
Farmer is also interested in religion and its varied forms, and has used it in his works.
My interest in religion has manifested itself throughout all my work. Although a lot of people,
when they say the name Farmer, immediately think of sex in both. Fact is I've written much more
about religion than about sex, or sometimes both at the same time. In some respects,
sex and religion are two sides of the same coin. In certain fields of activity.
But religion is only one of many themes. Farmer feels that he may have labored in relative anonymity
for years because his writings are so varied, but he has his reasons.
One of the reasons I've had trouble in the early days, I think really becoming identified and
getting a ban of followers is that I didn't beat on just one or two drums. I ranged all over the
field. But I find out that if I do a variety of stuff and I don't get tired, each new novel
challenge, I'm not just working the same old theme again.
Tomorrow we continue with more on Philip Jose Farmer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz. We're continuing our interview with Philip Jose Farmer.
We want to explore here some background related to one of Farmer's major themes, religion.
As Farmer allowed earlier, he considers himself a writer of religious themes even more so than a
writer of sexual themes. His own religious background is quite checkered.
And I always wrestled all my life with the problems of immortality,
pre-bestion, grace, the afterlife, and all that sort of stuff. I was raised as a
Christian scientist up until the time I was about 12, and then I was sent to a Presbyterian church
where there was a conflict between Christian science and the Presbyterian idea of predestination.
And then when I was about 16, I guess I became an atheist. Now I've gone through
atheism, through agnosticism, and then I was converted to the disciples of Christ.
And then I backslid, fell from grace, and as the theological term goes,
and then I lapsed back into agnosticism. And what are Farmer's present beliefs?
My present situation is that without immortality, life has no meaning. If there's a creation,
there must be a creator. But I've become tremendously interested in what to sometimes
refer to as mythism. It isn't really like the Muslims, the Muslims' Sufism school. Then
a lot of related stuff like that. You might see right now, I'm in a sort of a limbo,
heading towards something I don't know what. The concept of an afterlife appears repeatedly in
Farmer's works. Well, if you think about it, there could be a million different possibilities
in an afterlife of their work. But one of my perhaps unstated themes is that immortality
may not depend upon a supernatural being that's in the evolutionary drives of man,
for him to invent immortality himself. Drawback to that is, those people who are already dead
will remain dead, right? So that doesn't correspond to the religious idea of immortality,
where everybody is raised from the first human being to the last one.
I like to do a lot of variations on that. I have a new book called The Unreasoning Mask.
That's the quotation we'll be dick. And this is concerned with theology,
of afterlife, immortality. You might call it a philosophical theological space offer.
So,
many of Farmer's first works had the central theme of religion. The lovers and a woman a day
deal with a future amalgamation of church and state called the Sturge. A popular character,
Father John Carmody, is a planet hopping Catholic priest who has appeared in several short stories.
We learn about his former life and conversion in the excellent novel Night of Light.
Inside, Outside is a wild tale about the afterlife and immortality. It is in fact the
predecessor to the famous Riverworld series, which we will discuss in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz. Having looked into Philip Hosey Farmer's feelings on religion
and immortality, we began a look today at the Riverworld series. Farmer explains the basis of the story.
It concerns a planet in which there's a 10 million mile long river which follows the valley.
And everybody has lived from about 150,000 D.C. to about 1883 A.D. was resurrected along
the Bangsley River and rejuvenated for them, looks like they were 25. And the main mystery behind
the whole thing was why were all these people resurrected? Who did it and how?
But the Riverworld concept is so big that Farmer has managed only to scratch the surface in the
four main novels of the series. There are so many themes that I wanted to explore during the course
of those four novels, but I couldn't do it because I would have slowed the story down too much.
It wasn't taking too many sidetracks, you might say, and I'd still be working on that particular
series. What else is left? Listen to Farmer as he gives us an inkling of what he would like to cover.
I didn't go into any detail in how you work out viable societies with people from every place
every time. I also wanted to bring up in depth what would happen to famous people on that planet.
Well, there's Carl Marx, for instance. What would he think of what happened to his
ideas about communism on the planet Earth after he died? Leonardo da Vinci,
his ideas about art, what's the fact that he's on a planet where there are very few pigments
available, for instance, for him to paint? What would he do there?
I also wanted to
bring up various figures from science and the military and philosophy and so forth,
show what they would do there. Now, one of the things about the river world was that
although you were resurrected there in a useful body of your own, as it was in 25 or earlier,
you died before 25. If, for instance, you were 83 when you died and when your mind is still 83,
you have 83 years of experience on Earth behind you. Now, is your character formed? Are you going
to go through perhaps a thousand years being the same person or are you going to improve?
And is the magic labyrinth the last word on the river world?
I made a lot of people mad at me because of that last sentence or your paragraph.
I wrote in the magic labyrinth, everything seems to have been settled,
everything has been cleared up, and then one of the characters, the town of Latterman,
Peter J. Striggett, he's celebrating with the others in the misty tar when he thinks he hears
a football outside in the hallway, blows out, comes back, and says to the others,
I didn't see anyone, it must have been my imagination. A lot of readers got mad at me
because they thought, oh no, he's going right another one. He's leaving a loophole. Well,
I am leaving a loophole. I don't know whether I'll go through it or not, but it's quite possible that
the magic labyrinth wasn't the final one in that series before that everything that
our protagonist learned and everybody else learned is
clearly on through or half-streamed. So the river world novels may or may not be finished,
but we do have some more side stream stories to anticipate, more on Farmer tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz. Our show today continues the discussion with Philip
Jose Farmer. A major incident in Farmer's career began when Venus on the half-shell,
a novel written under the pseudonym Kilgore Trout, appeared in the pages of fantasy and
science fiction in late 74, early 75. Of course, Kilgore Trout is the creation of author Kurt
Vonnegut Jr. The character Trout is an impoverished, underappreciated science fiction writer who
appears in a number of Vonnegut's novels. We asked Farmer if he identifies with Kilgore Trout.
Vonnegut did not appreciate the reviews given Venus on the half-shell, either pro or con,
because most of the reviewers approached the work as if Vonnegut were the author.
This cost Farmer the opportunity to write another novel under the Kilgore Trout pseudonym.
When I applied for permission to write The Sun of Jimmy Valentine, which I really would have loved,
I could have had a lot of fun with it, he said no, which is his prerogative.
We asked if The Sun of Jimmy Valentine was Kilgore Trout's one erotic novel.
It was not only his one and only specifically erotic book, it was also his only non-science fiction book.
Farmer obviously enjoys writing about fictional authors who in turn write about their own fictional
authors and so on. Listen as he describes what writing as Kilgore Trout started.
In the Venus on the half-shell, the protagonist, Simon Lagstaff, had his favorite science fiction
author. Just as in Vonnegut's books, Elliot Rosewater thought that Kilgore Trout was the greatest
living writer in any field. He should have been president of the US and couldn't have solved
all the problems. Well anyway, in Venus on the half-shell, Simon Lagstaff liked to read the
science fiction works of a fellow called Jonathan Swiss Summers the Third, and I describe his various
works, their album, his entitled. But Jonathan Swiss Summers, who's a fictional author,
wrote about a giant German shepherd police dog whose IQ had been raised to about 200
in a laboratory and became a private detective. Now I plan eventually someday on writing a book
by Ralph von Baubau, this dog under the name of Ralph von Baubau. And then maybe I'll end the
cycle by having Ralph von Baubau write about a human named Vonnegut, something like that,
and completing it, going right back to Vonnegut again.
Farmer conceded with the extended family group called the Vold Newton family, in which many
great historical and fictional characters are descended from the scarlet Pimpernel. Thus Kilgore
Trout is related to Sherlock Holmes, Doc Savage, Sam Spade, and James Bond, among others. We will
look into this aspect of Farmer's writing some more tomorrow. This has been the Science Fiction
Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction
with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz. This show will conclude our interview with Philip Jose
Farmer. Yesterday we discussed Farmer's pension for writing under pseudonyms,
as it turns out this practice has a very desirable side effect.
One of the funny things about this is that I found out that I could use the fictional
author device to break a writing block. I had a writing block once, that terrible thing that
sometimes happens to writers, or they don't know what caused this for some reason.
They might have many ideas, be eager to go, but when they sit down in front of the typewriter
nothing happens. Well, that happened to me once. I never thought it would, I thought I was immune
to such a thing. But it did, and after wrestling for two months and getting no place, I had an idea.
I sat down with the typewriter and wrote a story,
not by Philip Jose Farmer, but by David Copperfield, I'd say. I don't remember which
particular nom, the story might be. The story poured out, very good, I thought so anyway.
When I'd completed that, the writing block was gone. See, I wasn't writing then as me,
Philip Jose Farmer, but as I say, Gilbert Trout. And I was in his shoes, I had no trouble. Now,
the funny thing about this is that it's a psychological trick that I'm conscious of,
and yet it works. It's not like I'm trying to trick my unconscious, but I must be doing it one way or
another. Well, I don't know if anybody else has ever broken this writer's block in that manner,
but I recommend trying it. Farmer has also written several books featuring Tarzan or Tarzan-like
characters. Tarzan Alive is Tarzan's biography. The erotic novel A Feast Unknown and its clean
sequels The Mad Goblin and Lord of the Trees feature thinly veiled versions of Tarzan and
Doc Savage. Lord Tiger, the Opar books, and the adventures of the peerless peer also have Tarzan
like protagonists. We asked Farmer when he developed his interest in Tarzan.
But later Farmer picked up on Tarzan again. This time he saw Tarzan in a different light.
This is a very interesting thing before. He was not just a child who'd been cast away
and raised by great apes and then become a creature of the jungle, then returned to playing
sports, and he was sort of an archetype of many, many heroes from classical myth.
And now I'm sure that when Burroughs wrote this, he didn't know what he was doing,
but he did unconsciously. I think it was the creation of Tarzan and the Strogan
Genius. Burroughs is not a great writer, but he has created a great character just like
A. Conan Doyle is not a great writer, but he created a great character, Sherlock Holmes.
Philip Jose Farmer, an author with a seemingly endless supply of unique ideas who appears just
now to be gaining widespread acceptance.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.